+++
title = "Packing concave molecules in crystals and amorphous solids: On the connection between shape and local structure"
date = 2015-04-21
draft = false

# Authors. Comma separated list, e.g. `["Bob Smith", "David Jones"]`.
authors = ["Jennings, Cerridwen", "Ramsay, Malcolm", "Hudson, Toby", "Harrowell, Peter"]

# Publication type.
# Legend:
# 0 = Uncategorized
# 1 = Conference paper
# 2 = Journal article
# 3 = Manuscript
# 4 = Report
# 5 = Book
# 6 = Book section
publication_types = ["2"]

# Publication name and optional abbreviated version.
publication = "Molecular Physics"
publication_short = "Mol. Phys."

# Abstract and optional shortened version.
abstract = "The structure of the densest crystal packings is determined for a variety of concave shapes in 2D constructed by the overlap of two or three discs. The maximum contact number per particle pair is defined and proposed as a useful means of categorizing particle shape. We demonstrate that the densest packed crystal exhibits a maximum in the number of contacts per particle but does not necessarily include particle pairs with the maximum contact number. In contrast, amorphous structures, generated by energy minimisation of high temperature liquids, typically do include maximum contact pairs. The amorphous structures exhibit a large number of contacts per particle corresponding to over-constrained structures. Possible consequences of this over-constraint are discussed."

# Featured image thumbnail (optional)
image_preview = ""

# Is this a selected publication? (true/false)
selected = false

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this publication with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's filename without extension.
#   E.g. `projects = ["deep-learning"]` references `content/project/deep-learning.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects = []`.
projects = []

# Tags (optional).
#   Set `tags = []` for no tags, or use the form `tags = ["A Tag", "Another Tag"]` for one or more tags.
tags = []

# Links (optional).
url_pdf = "http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00268976.2015.1046528"
url_preprint = ""
url_code = ""
url_dataset = ""
url_project = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""
url_poster = ""
url_source = ""

# Custom links (optional).
#   Uncomment line below to enable. For multiple links, use the form `[{...}, {...}, {...}]`.
# url_custom = [{name = "Custom Link", url = "http://example.org"}]

# Does this page contain LaTeX math? (true/false)
math = false

# Does this page require source code highlighting? (true/false)
highlight = false

# Featured image
# Place your image in the `static/img/` folder and reference its filename below, e.g. `image = "example.jpg"`.
[header]
image = ""
caption = ""

+++
